This age of internet censorship should have been the chance for the free world
to show America the inferiority of it's ways.  But, thanks to the rise of web
safetyism, governments around the world instead determined to vindicate the
most paranoid rantings of gun-toting, liberty fanatics from James Madison
onwards.  Governments are starting to make censorship mandatory, and America's
constitutional order is starting to look like the world's only line of defense.

So far in this millenium, public discourse has moved onto digital platforms
owned and controlled by a handful of private companies. There might have been a
time, back when Twitter's then CEO Jack Dorsey was lauded for calling his
company "the free speech wing of the free speech party", that the large digital
platforms instinctively respected their users and saw their mission as
connecting those users to their desired sources of information.

But over time, these platforms drifted towards an ideology we might call "web
safetyism" which holds that the duty of these companies is not to respect their
users but to protect them, to serve them but not when they request information
understood to be hate speech, misinformation, disinformation or otherwise
harmful.

History has seen this script before, every regime of censorship has claimed to
protect the public from harmful discourse. But no regime can have privileged,
prior knowledge of what is true and good -- it can only know and uphold the
approved narrative. No one sould be fooled into thinking that censorship just
because it is called safety, nor should anyone forget that it is an affront the
basic workings of any liberal democracy. Yet society is being fooled; these
prinicples of free speech are so well-known and time tested that it has become
boring, and have thus lots their hold on the minds young people, their teachers
and even of of middle-managers.

What does have hold their attention is the censorship industry speaking
language of web safety. There is a network of organisations in government,
acedemia and the nonprofit sector which earn their keep by warning of the
dangers of harmful information and offering the helpful service of telling the
rest of the world what information is harmful. [LINK Schellenberger, or Tiabbi,
look into the RMIT Fact Lab debacle].

The censorship industry has a self-justifying ideology about the importance
connecting the public to trusted source of information and protecting it from
harmful ideas. This ideology has been known and refuted since the
Englightenment, but the hacks of the industry aren't obliged to pay attention.
They are, however, obliged to follow the law and every country has a
constitutional order underpinning it's own laws.  In the United States, a
centrepiece of that order is the first Amendment, which says:

> Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or
> prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or
> of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to
> petition the government for a redress of grievances.

Under modern case law, this has become a stunningly broad limit on the powers
of government. Going far beyond the literal text, it tightly constrains the
power of any arm of any American government, whether federal, state or to
abridging the freedom of speech or the press. Although all free countries
espouse the freedom of speech, few are so willing to clip government's wings.
For example, [article 5](https://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/gg/art_5.html) of
Germany's constitution avers that "These [free expression] rights shall find
their limits in the provisions of general laws."

American courts have however stopped short of applying their First Amendment to
the dealings that private entities have with each other.  There are good rasons
for this: if hostess Alice is perfectly entitled to throw Holocaust denying Bob
out of her dinner party, even though Holocaust denial is protected by the first
Amendment.  At least until some positive statue says otherwise, Bob will just
have to exercise is right elsewhere; and even such statutes will have to
respect with Alice's own rights of free speech and association.

All this becomes a very live issue when we encounter censorship by digital
platforms. Services such as a social networks and search engines are not
telephone lines; when we engage these services we want them to filter out spam,
or rank order search results.  We neither desire nor expect a passively neutral
conduit of information. Yet we can desire  an _active neutrality_ that respects
the user. Searches should rank results by relevance to the user, and not by
social desirability and if a message is filtered away as spam, that should be
because the user does not want it.

Instead, thanks to web safetyism, the platforms began to filter based on what
user _ought_ to want.  They chose to respect the censorship industry more than
their users. This would be one thing these platforms were merely a handful of
publishers among many. But no, they are called platforms for a reason; they are
the platforms on which modern public discourse happen.

Governments should be concerned about this fundamental threat to democracy; and
in principle this situation should have been a one-up for those constitutions
which give the governments to tackle it without America's Madisonian
hand-wringing about the speech rights of the platforms themselves.

Instead governments of democracies around the world have used their free hand to
do just the opposite. Instead of requiring companies to respect the user enough
to providing them a platforms to discuss their viewpoints freely, these
countries are instead legislating to demand that these companies comply with
the censorship industry.

**The EU's the Digital Services Act** ....

**Britain's Online Safety Bill** Is, at the time of writing, passing through
Parliament. It requires "user-to-user services" to block illegal content
(earlier drafts also inlcuded "legal but harmful" content). It also gives
authorities the power to block specific sites and to issue and change codes of
practice which will be used to interpret the law.

**Australia's proposed ACMA powers Bill** Has been proposed by Australia's
communications minister.  It empowers authorities to bind digital platforms to
mandatory Misinformation Codes and Standards that require them to block content
defined as misinformation. The definition of misinformation is rather vague,
but the Bill makes a clear exception for the speech of government, officially
recognized media, and educational instutions (inlcuding even those owned by
foreign governments).



Whatever their differences, what these statues have in common is that they push
the work of decisions onto the platforms. There's no process to review these
decisions to ensure the blocked speech actually violated some law, these
matters are left to the discretion of the platforms. But that discretion will
be exercised under the shadow of laws which not punish them for permitting
disapproved speech and not punish them for censoring legal speech.

These bills generally define harmful speech and misinformation in vague and
expansive ways. But even if they had in legally clear definitions that align
with well-established democratic norms, the censorship would go far beyond
that. These law do not subject individual decisions to censor to any legal
procedure, instead they are left to up to risk-averse corporations who need to
stay in the good-books of a regulator.

These laws are not simply an expression of these countries own constitutional
norms. They are a dodge around those norms. Democarcies boast speech because
citizens can't be muzzled at the mere say-so of some censor. Even in
democracies with nothing like America's First Amendment, speech can only be
limited by definite laws. That's why Germany's constitution names **general**
laws (along with the protection of young persons and the right to personal
honour) as the limits on free speech.

Today's intermediated internet is far less protective than this tradition.
Posts can quietly disappear or be down-ranked without the action ever being
acknowledged, let alone justified relative to some legal standard. Governments
and the censorship industry have not been shy about taking advantage of the
opportunity to skirt their own norms. 

The American government is exception, as is best documented in the [Twitter
Files][TRACK DOWN LINKS & REPORTERS NAMES]. This reporting from [NAME SOME
TWITTER FILE REPORTERS] which shows the elaborately organised channels through
which American security agencies gave instructions to Twitter and other
companies about what information to suppress. The censorship ranged from
stamping down on Covid [FIND LINK] heterodoxy to protecting prominent
politicians from scandalous revelations [FIND HB LAPTOP LINK]. [REREAD SOME
TWITTER-FILES REPORTAGE AND REWRITE THIS].

American courts are now being asked to rule on how deal with this apparent
violation of the first Amendment [LINK TO CASES]. Some American states have
also started to legislate against censorship by digital platforms [TEXAS HB20,
FLORIDA BILL] -- and these laws are themselves been tested in court against the
First Amendment.

But the most potent response of all has been from the market.  Free-thinking
journals like [Quillete][LINK], [UnhHerd][LINK], [....] surged in popularity
even before [Substack][LINK] supercharged the phenomenon by popularising
commercial blogging for the orthodox and heteredox alike.  [Twitter/X][LINK]
has has become a more open place since Elon Musk's quixotic takeover.
[Rumble][LINK] has become a viable for those who need an alternative to
YouTube. The list goes on.

The consensus around what narratives to support or suppress is cracking. Yet
even as voluntary private-sector censorship begins to fail, governments are
shoring it up with innovatively illiberal laws. Proponents of this
industrial-scale speech squishing would say the old norms aren't fit for the
challenges of the new age. In a world where posts go viral, it would simply be
too expensive to actually prosecute the bad guys or otherwise to be bound by
the rule of law.

Yet far for being a response to new circumstances, this innovation is a throw
back to the dawn of the printing press. Renaissance princes as found it much
easier to regulate printers than authors and much more effective to quietly
strangle publication than to risk high-profile trials.

The failure of this approach should be a warning from history. Today the
printing presses of the advanced world are remarkably free.  Whatever laws
might regulate the electronic media, it is the sacred right of the literati to
put almost any kind of [smut][LINK 50 shades of grey or better] or
[nononsense][Link to Das Kapital or better] into print. This sacred right is
the outcome of a Darwinian process where minority of societies taking this
seemingly immoderate approach included those that were long lived, prosperous,
powerful or humane enough to set the standards for the civilsed world.

Will civilisation have to re-learn this lesson the hard way? To prevent this,
people must push back against the language of online safety and harm and
reground their traditional liberal approaches. America's dynamic entrepreneurs,
stroppy governers and hair-splitting constitutional lawyers are making a good
start.  But the rest of the world should not wait for America to save itself.

Liberalism in Australia is also showing belated signs of fighting spirit. The
government's new misinformation law has not yet passed, and is looking
increasingly friendless. It has been denounced by Australia's [Human Rights
Commission][LINK], by the [Victorian Bar Association][LINK] and by [prominent
scholars][LIINK] and [Publications][LINK]. The government has also suddenly
turned shy about it's promise publish public submissions about the Bill [FILL
IN MORE DETAIL HERE]. Australian society is clearly not tamely accepting the
narrative of internet safetyism [BRING INTERNET SAFETYISM UP EARLIER AND MAKE
IT A THEME]. 

Although this draft legislation was [spawned][link] under the previous
conservative government, they have now [have come out against it][link] from
opposition. Conservatives are belatedly starting to see through the rhetoric of
web safety and observe the hostitlity of the censorship industry.

The left also needs to wise up.  That side of politics has always afraid of a
world in in which security forces can whisper in the ears of powerful censors.
And those fears are being realised, though perhaps not in the way that anyone
expected. Today [skeptics of drug companies][link], [Russia-friendly
doves][link] and even [radical feminists][link] are becoming associated with
the political right.  Left-wingers who imagine they are winning the culture war
observe that farfrom their ideas taking over the centres power, those centres
are taking over the left.

With luck liberal force on the right and left, can hold back this legislation.
But there's no need to just stay on the defensive. If there is a political will
behind "holding big tech to account", it should be used to entrench free speech
and open discourse.  Liberals can jiu-jitsu the censorship industry's efforts
and introduce legislation which guarantees neutrality, transaprency and
procedural fairness in content moderation.

Nobody likes their social media feed to be full of scams and vitriol, nor do
parents want their children subjected to bullying and indoctrination via their
phones.  But we can fight that without handing power to censorious,
indoctrinating bullies who treat us all like children.
